---

layout : post

title : Popular Linux Commands

---

h2. {{page.title}}

p(publish_date). 14 November 2012


Since I usually work with Linux in the command line, I have made a list of the most common commands that you will encounter in a day-to-day basis.

Clear the screen

<pre> clear </pre>

Show current directory path

<pre> pwd </pre>

List directory

<pre>ls</pre>

List directory with permissions

<pre>ls -l</pre>

List directory with hidden files

<pre>ls -a</pre>

Print the username

<pre>whoami</pre>

Display all users currently logged into the server

<pre>who</pre>

Online Help Command

<pre> man </pre>

Specify details of the directory itself

<pre>ls -ld</pre>

List all directories with the beginning of the letter "x"; you can change
the x to search which ever letter you want.

<pre> ls -ld x*</pre>

Allows you to not only display current directory's contents but any subdirectory contents contained in the current directory.

<pre> ls -R example </pre>

Creates an empty file

<pre> touch </pre>

Moves on file to another location, it can also be used to rename exisiting files
or directories.

<pre> mv [current location] [new location] </pre>

Copy files, directories to another directory

<pre> cp [current location] [new location] </pre>

Remove/Delete entire directory.

<pre> rmdir [directory name] </pre>

If the directory is not empty you may have to give is the flag of -r for recursive and -f for force.

<pre> rm -rf [directory name] </pre>

Display contents of a file

<pre> cat </pre>

Those are the most basic commands that you will need. Try to memorize them or you can always come back here for reference.

