---

layout : post

title : Ubuntu Server - Install PHP & MySQL & Apache

---

h2. {{page.title}}

p(publish_date). 24 July 2013

Apache is one of the most popular web servers in the world. In this blog we are going to install Apache along with PHP a popular programming language and MYSQL which is an open relational dabtabase managment system. All these three make for a powerful combination and you are able to run frameworks like Wordpress.

To install Apache, MySQL & PHP type the following command into your server.

<pre name="code" class="bash">sudo aptitude install apache2 php5-mysql libapache2-mod-php5 mysql-server
</pre>

Following, you will be asked for two solutions. 

Type Y and press Enter

Next, MYSQL will ask you for a password. Do not leave empty. Type a very strong password and remember it. 

Now, lets test out your server, type: 

<pre name="code" class="bash">
ifconfig | grep inet
</pre>

You shall see an IP address, make not of it. Open your browser on another computer and type the first or second ip address..usually it starts with 192.*.*.*. 
You should see a message saying "It works!". 


h4. Testing MySQL

MySQL comes with a command line shell that you can access. Let access it.
Type the following:

<pre name="code" class="bash">
mysql -u root -p
</pre>

You will be asked for a password, enter it and voila.

Type <pre name="code" class="bash">EXIT; </pre> to exit.

I will cover mysql commands in a different blog. For now, we successfully installed Apache, MYSQL and PHP. Yey!!!